Let's now talk about conditionals. So here we have a simple service.yaml file, part of the template
of our chart. And we have a values file that has some default values set. We're planning to add
some custom labels that help group objects based on organization. So we add a label section. However,
this could be different for different releases. So we create a property under values.yaml,
and templatize it. Now that works fine. However, this value is optional. So we don't want to add
the org label, or these lines if this value was not specified in the values.yaml file. So we
want to conditionally add these lines depending upon whether the variable was defined or not. In
the programming world, we use if statements for conditional blocks. So here's a simple program
that prints a variable called org_label. If we want to conditionally run the print statement,
only if the variable is set, then we encapsulate the print statement within an if conditional block.
This way, only if the variable or label is set, the print statement runs. Similarly, in Helm charts,
we can encapsulate the lines that we want to be available in an if conditional block, only if the
org label value is defined. The if conditional block is similar to any scripting or programming
languages that you may be familiar with. The only exception is that it is also within the curly braces
as it's part of the templating language. So this gives us this YAML file with the org labels set
as expected. If the org label value is not set in the values.yaml file, then this won't be
available in the output file either. Okay, so let's add it back. And let's look at the conditional
statements in a bit more detail. As you can see, there are two empty lines in the generated file.
This is because when the template is converted to a manifest file, everything between the curly
braces are removed. However, there are still white spaces left on those lines before the curly braces
start. As such, they continue to be available on the generated files as well. There are ways to get
rid of white spaces. In this case, since the white spaces are before the template directive starts or
near to the beginning of the curly braces, we can add a dash right after the curly braces to indicate
Helm to trim those out when the files are generated. And note that the dash should be right after the
second curly brace. And also there should be a space between the dash and anything that comes
after it. This way, the extra spaces are gone. And so are those extra lines. So back to our programming
language example, if there is an if statement, then we know that there is an else statement as
well. And if there is an if and else statement, then there has to be an else if statement as
well. So we have if else if and else statements in if conditional blocks. And similarly, we can
have else if and else statements within conditional blocks in Helm charts like this. Note that the
equality is checked using the EQ function like this. So EQ is a function that takes two arguments
and returns true if they are equal. In this case, it takes the value of the org label variable and
the text HR for comparison. There are many other functions as well, such as the NE for not equal
LT for less than LE for less than or equal to GT for greater than G for greater than or equal to NOT
for negation, and EMPTY, which is where the value is empty. So you don't usually use the equal to
operators to check comparison. Instead, you use functions for everything. Now, one of the common
examples or use cases where you will see conditionals used a lot is whether to create objects
of certain kinds or not. For example, here I have a service account template file as part of
the templates of our chart, among the many other template files that are available.
However, I don't always want this to be created, I want to provide an option for the user to customize the
creation of the service account based on a setting in the values.yaml file. So I add a section
called service account with a field create set to true. And I only want to create the service account
if this field is set to true. So we add a conditional block around the entire template file
to only be created if this value is set to true in the YAML file. Well, that's all for now.
I will see you in the next one.